# Angular Fundamentals #

Angular components can be thought of as being either Controllers, Views, Services, Routing, Directives, and Testing. Angular is opinioned, so to get the most out of it, and reduce dependencies on other libraries, you should understand how things work the Angular way.

When reading markup, remember that Angular can both leverage directives, and controllers, where you can create new tags that refer to larger controllers or add in ng attributes for leveraging directives.

Remember that Angular can be set up to leverage *end-to-end* testing.....

Angular uses two way binding so your view is updated when you model changes.


## Markup and Controllers ##

Note that this course focuses on Angular 1, but Angular 2 is out, and has some significant changes you should be mindful of.

In Angular, modules are the collections of files that together form some bigger purpose. Your controllers, services, templates, etc are bundled into modules. You add a module to a page load like

```
// Let's add the eventsApp module to our page and it has no dependencies on
// other modules, but we still pass the empty array
var eventsApp = angular.module('eventsApp', []);
```

Controllers create a *scope* which is the means to communicate with the view. The scope helps deliver the model to the view, and actions through the view to change the model may go through the scope. The scope may have methods that your view binds to.

After you create a controller in your app, and have markup that uses that controller, you write your controller function, where you pass as the first parameter your scope, which really should be called `$scope`. Any properties, fields, or methods you put onto `$scope` will be accessible in your controller.

Remember you can use `ng-repeat` on elements to repeat them for a given interable in JavaScript.

You can add click events with `ng-click`, and you can specify a click handler function that is a method on your scope (put your click handler as a scope method).
